Let’s talk about creating
and using enumerations.
Wikipedia defines enumeration
as a complete ordered listing of
all the items in a collection.
The term is commonly used
in mathematics and computer
science to refer to a listing
of all the elements of a set.
An enum type is the reference
type in Java that supports an
enumeration, providing support for
a set of predefined constants in
a particular order and the methods
to access them as well as referring
to them by their constant names.
Some examples of enumerated
sets are the days of the week
or the months of the year.
These are finite sets of data,
with which predefined constants
would be easy to understand:
[Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, etc].
Under the covers, enum is just
another class implicitly extending
the abstract class java.lang.Enum.
Therefore, any enum you declare
cannot extend another enum or class.
Conversely, you also cannot
explicitly extend java.lang.Enum.
If you see an extends clause used
on an enum declaration on the
exam, you'll know that you're
looking at a compiler error.
In addition, it is a compiler
error to attempt to explicitly
instantiate an enum type.
The enum types constants are the only
instances allowable for an enum type.
So, Oracle's Java specification
specifies the enum type
declaration as follows:
ClassModifier, enum, TypeIdentifier,
SuperInterfaces, and the EnumBody.
So, the link to the specifications
for enums is in the resources
section of this video.
This is the link that I’m
putting on screen now.
So, check that out
for more information.
Now, I won't be talking about super
interfaces in this video, but I
will show an example of an enum
implementing an interface in a later
video in this section of the course.
At a minimum, an example
looks like the following.
enum BinaryValues left
to right curly braces.
The rules for the access modifiers
are the same as we've
reviewed for a class.
Public and none package-private are
the only valid access modifiers if the
enum is not enclosed by another type.
If the ename is public and
not enclosed, then the source
file name must match the
enum name [TypeIdentifier].
All four access modifiers are valid if
the enum is enclosed by another type. And other modifiers,
Well, the other modifiers you would apply
to an enum are static and strictfp.
Although a nested enum can be declared
static, it's redundant, since the
nested enum type is implicitly static.
An enum type declaration is
implicitly final unless an
enum constant has a class body.
It's a compile-time error to
declare an enum type final.
And finally, it is a
compile-time error to declare
an enum type abstract.
So, next, let's discuss the EnumBody.
So from the specification, you can
see that on screen there now, the
most common form of an enum is a
list of constants in the EnumBody
as shown in the example below.
Because they're constants,
the names are in uppercase
letters but note that this is a
standard and not a requirement.
All right, so swinging back to
our Fundamentals project that
we've been using in this section.
We need to create a new Java class.
So, I'm going to do that, New
and noticing here when I select
new Java class, we've got an
option down here for an Enum.
IntelliJ does that for us.
So, I'm going to select that.
I'm going to call this
one days of the week.
I'm going to paste in
the code we'll be using.
Well, so this code that I’ve
pasted in is first creating a
public enum called days of the
week, and obviously, that's in the
DaysOfTheWeek.java source file.
But you can see that one
of the constraints sunday
is not all uppercase.
Constants in uppercase is a coding
standard but not required by Java.
Now a package-private class named
test days of the week is below that.
You can see it starting on line 15,
and that's exercising the static
values method of an enum, specifically
on line 20, and that returns an array
of the instances of days of the week
represented by the seven constants
that we've defined on line 12.
The ordinal value as well as
the value of each is printed.
You can see we're using
.values and .ordinal there.
I'm ending the method down the
bottom on line 25 by demonstrating an
example of the value of static method.
So, if you run this code…
You can see we've got the
various days of the week showing.
Now, the best way to understand
what an enum looks like to the
JVM is to examine the class
that the compiler creates.
So, we're going to have
a go at doing that.
So, what we want to do is open the
project pane and I’ll close the
runtime window down, the output pane
roller, and we're going to go to the
output folder that contains the code.
You can see that my code
here in IntelliJ is out,
production, Fundamentals and
that's where the code is.
You can see that for
our days of the week,
we've got DaysOfTheWeek.class there.
So, I'm going to right-click the
folder and open the terminals
or open in terminal, and we're
just going to size it up for now.
Now, in the terminal window, I'm
going to execute or use rather the
Java tool, javap, which disassembles
a class file that's generated.
I'm going to type javap DaysOfTheWeek.
Remembering, I need to be in the exact
directory where the class file is.
You can see on screen there the output
generated and looking at the code
specifically, you can see that each
of the constants named in our simple
enum is defined as a final attribute
on a class named DaysOfTheWeek.
And in addition, two static
methods are available to each enum.
The values method and
the value of method.
So, an important thing to note is that
the class DaysOfTheWeek shown in this
listing, which our enum represents
is declared final if none of the
enum constants have a body block.
And you can see that is the case
which is why it is declared final.
Now, we'll discuss body blocks for
constants in an upcoming video.
Now, I pointed out in my 10Z-819
Part 1 java certification course
here on Udemy, specifically section
4 - switch decision construct
that an enum type is a valid
type for a switch statement.
So, let's just take a quick look
at one, so I'm going to close down
this terminal session now and go
back to full screen for our code.
What I'm going to do is
replace our for loop, this code
here with a new bit of code
that I'm going to paste in.
And you can see the
code on screen now.
You can see what we're doing
there, we're basically using
the enum in a switch statement.
So, if we run the code now…
you can see the output
that it's produced.
Let's finish the video here and
in the next one, I want to explore
enums a bit more, specifically
because an enum is a class, you can
have all the members of class can.
So, let's discuss that and look into
it in more detail in the next video.